src/content/articles/building-the-future-with-ai.mdx, before:

---
title: "Building the Future with AI-Powered Development"
description: "How GitHub Copilot and AI-assisted tools are transforming the way we write software, and what it means for the next generation of developers."
pubDate: 2026-02-14
tags: ["AI", "GitHub Copilot", "Developer Experience"]
draft: false
---

## The Shift from Writing Code to Directing Code

Software development is undergoing a fundamental transformation. For decades, the craft centered on typing syntax—memorizing APIs, wrestling with boilerplate, and debugging typos. Today, the role of the developer is evolving from *writing* code to *directing* it. We describe intent, review suggestions, and shape architecture while AI handles the repetitive scaffolding.

This isn't about replacing developers. It's about elevating what we do. The most valuable skill is no longer how fast you can type a `for` loop—it's how clearly you can articulate what needs to be built and why.

## GitHub Copilot in the Daily Workflow

I use GitHub Copilot every single day. It's not a novelty anymore; it's infrastructure. From generating unit tests to drafting documentation, Copilot has become the pair programmer that never gets tired and never judges your variable names.

Here's a simple example—asking Copilot to help scaffold an API route:

```typescript
// Express route to fetch user profile by ID
app.get("/api/users/:id", async (req, res) => {
  const user = await db.users.findUnique({
    where: { id: req.params.id },
  });
  if (!user) return res.status(404).json({ error: "User not found" });
  res.json(user);
});
```

What used to take a few minutes of context-switching through docs now flows naturally inside the editor. The feedback loop tightens, and you stay in the zone longer.

## Developer Experience in the Age of AI

> The best tools don't just make developers faster—they make development *enjoyable*.

Developer experience (DX) has always mattered, but AI amplifies its importance. When your AI assistant understands your codebase, respects your conventions, and integrates seamlessly into your editor, the compounding productivity gains are enormous. Poor DX, on the other hand, creates friction that no amount of AI can overcome.

That's why investing in great tooling—clear APIs, well-structured repositories, thoughtful CI/CD pipelines—pays dividends. AI thrives in well-organized environments, just like humans do.

## What the Future Looks Like

We're heading toward a world where developers spend more time on design, architecture, and user empathy, and less time on mechanical translation of ideas into syntax. AI won't eliminate the need for deep technical knowledge—if anything, understanding *how* systems work becomes more critical when you're orchestrating them at a higher level.

The developers who thrive will be the ones who embrace AI as a collaborator, stay curious, and never stop learning. The future of software isn't about humans versus machines. It's about what we can build together.

Commit message:

chore: update article frontmatter and add DEV.to sync functionality
- Updated frontmatter for multiple articles to include devto_id and devto_hash.
- Enhanced article descriptions and titles for better readability.
- Implemented a GitHub Actions workflow to sync articles to DEV.to.
- Created a script to handle the synchronization of articles, including handling tags and content formatting.
- Added a new consulting page with service offerings and a booking section.
- Introduced a plugin to wrap tables in a scrollable div for improved responsiveness.
- Adjusted styles in ArticleLayout for better typography and spacing.

src/content/articles/building-the-future-with-ai.mdx, after:

---
title: Building the Future with AI-Powered Development
description: >-
  How GitHub Copilot and AI-assisted tools are transforming the way we write
  software, and what it means for the next generation of developers.
pubDate: 2026-02-14T00:00:00.000Z
tags:
  - AI
  - GitHub Copilot
  - Developer Experience
draft: false
devto_id: 3256878
devto_hash: bd35e783710018b5
---

## The Shift from Writing Code to Directing Code

Software development is undergoing a fundamental transformation. For decades, the craft centered on typing syntax—memorizing APIs, wrestling with boilerplate, and debugging typos. Today, the role of the developer is evolving from *writing* code to *directing* it. We describe intent, review suggestions, and shape architecture while AI handles the repetitive scaffolding.

This isn't about replacing developers. It's about elevating what we do. The most valuable skill is no longer how fast you can type a `for` loop—it's how clearly you can articulate what needs to be built and why.

## GitHub Copilot in the Daily Workflow

I use GitHub Copilot every single day. It's not a novelty anymore; it's infrastructure. From generating unit tests to drafting documentation, Copilot has become the pair programmer that never gets tired and never judges your variable names.

Here's a simple example—asking Copilot to help scaffold an API route:

```typescript
// Express route to fetch user profile by ID
app.get("/api/users/:id", async (req, res) => {
  const user = await db.users.findUnique({
    where: { id: req.params.id },
  });
  if (!user) return res.status(404).json({ error: "User not found" });
  res.json(user);
});
```

What used to take a few minutes of context-switching through docs now flows naturally inside the editor. The feedback loop tightens, and you stay in the zone longer.

## Developer Experience in the Age of AI

> The best tools don't just make developers faster—they make development *enjoyable*.

Developer experience (DX) has always mattered, but AI amplifies its importance. When your AI assistant understands your codebase, respects your conventions, and integrates seamlessly into your editor, the compounding productivity gains are enormous. Poor DX, on the other hand, creates friction that no amount of AI can overcome.

That's why investing in great tooling—clear APIs, well-structured repositories, thoughtful CI/CD pipelines—pays dividends. AI thrives in well-organized environments, just like humans do.

## What the Future Looks Like

We're heading toward a world where developers spend more time on design, architecture, and user empathy, and less time on mechanical translation of ideas into syntax. AI won't eliminate the need for deep technical knowledge—if anything, understanding *how* systems work becomes more critical when you're orchestrating them at a higher level.

The developers who thrive will be the ones who embrace AI as a collaborator, stay curious, and never stop learning. The future of software isn't about humans versus machines. It's about what we can build together.
